# NBA-regular-season-playoffs-comparison

In this project I am hoping to dive deep into what makes the NBA playoffs different from the regular season, and how that should inform the roster building process for NBA teams that have hopes of competing. As a huge fan of the Milwaukee Bucks I am very much aware of how different the NBA regular season is from the playoffs. There are many people who will claim that the NBA playoffs are just "different" citing harder play, better defense, slower pace, and more overall intensity. Going into this project this is definitely a belief I had as well.

An example that reaffirmed this in my mind was looking at my own favorite team, the Milwaukee Bucks. In the 2018-19 NBA season after years of mediocrity and led by their superstar Giannis Antetokounmpo and new coach Mike Budenholzer they finally broke into title contention status with an astounding 60-22 record. However, they did not make it to the finals this season. After beating the Pistons and Celtics with relative ease in the first two rounds, (they only lost one combined game in those two series), they lost in the Eastern Conference Finals to the Toronto Raptors in 6 games after jumping out to an initial 2-0 series lead. Despite having who many would agree was the best player in the series in Giannis, and a solid supporting cast with guys like smooth-shoothing Khris Middleton and conventional big man turned 3-point specialist Brook Lopez, they could not get it done. One of the big reasons for this were defensive adjustments the Raptors made, if you want to know more read this article it does a good job summing it up: https://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/nba/columnist/jeff-zillgitt/2019/05/26/how-raptors-turned-series-around-beat-bucks/1241494001/ 

The Bucks had a very skilled team around Giannis with a large focus on efficiency. Giannis is at his best when he is close to the basket, and new coach Mike Budenholzer harnessed that and used that to fuel the Bucks' efficiency because whenever Giannis would be close to the basket the defense would start to collapse leaving more spacing on the perimeter. The Bucks decided to make a dedicated effort to surround Giannis with players that could shoot to take advantage of this. However, some of these players were good shooters, but they lacked a skill that is very important when you get to the playoffs: shot creation. This meant that when the shooters around Giannis were not shooting well the opposing team could focus on creating a "wall", a strategy popularized by the Raptors in that 2019 Eastern Conference Finals series, to limit Giannis' effectiveness. This strategy would be used against them once again the next year when they got upset by the Miami Heat in the 2020 Eastern Conference Semifinals.

Going back to the 2019 Eastern Conference Final series loss, there seemed to be another more intangible factor that went into why the Bucks were to able to win this series. Playoff experience is something that could be quantified and is something that the Bucks lacked at the time. It is a common belief that is experience playing in the playoffs is a vital element of having a team that make a deep postseason run. For reference, at the time of this series I was a high school Junior and the Bucks had not won a playoff series in my lifetime. The last time thehy had won a playoff series was in 2001 when they beat the Charlotte Hornets in the Eastern Conference Semi-Finals with a team that included that likes of Ray Allen, Glenn Robinson and Sam Cassell. This may seem like a tangent, but I bring this up to emphasize that it had been a long time since the Bucks had made it out of the first round of the playoffs, and Giannis got to experience this his first 3 trips to the playoffs in 2015, 2017 & 2018. A more intangible factor that could prove harder to quantify would be "toughness" for a lack of a better word. When the Bucks played well in the Raptors series they played really well, but they did not seem to have the ability to make the necessary adjustments needed whenever the momentum started to shift in the Raptors' favor. I bring up playoff experience because it gives teams and players the learning opportunities that create this sense of "toughness" that helps them be able to adapt to the events that take place during a playoff series.

The Bucks serve as a example to look at for this thought experiment because they would go on to win the NBA Championship in the 2020-21 season. This case is interesting because after two straight seasons of being the top seeded team in the Eastern Conference heading into the playoffs, in this season they were only the 3 seed. In the COVID-shortened 2020-21 season the Bucks finished with a record of 46-26 which seems considerably worse than their 60-22 and 56-17 records from the last two seasons. However, they made additions like defensive-minded guard Jrue Holiday, tough shot creating big man Bobby Portis, and defensive stopper P.J. Tucker to the roster to increase the team's physicality. In the previous two years the Bucks seemed like the less aggresive team in the series that they lost to the Raptors and Heat, so they wanted to bring in some guys who would help instill more of a "dog" mentality in the team as P.J. Tucker put it. So even though this team had less spacing, was less offensively potent than some of it's previous iterations, and had a worse regular season, this team is the only Bucks team in the Giannis era that has succeeded in the ultimate goal of brining a championship to Milwaukee. 
